Add layered security contexts. (#9)
tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-external-psk-importer: draft-ietf-tls-external-psk-importer.md

       name: Christopher A. Wood
       organization: Apple, Inc.
       email: cawood@apple.com
 -

>        ins: J. G. Hoyland

Reviewer: nit: Author names should be alphabetical. :-)

# Introduction

TLS 1.3 supports PSK-based handshakes, wherein PSKs can be established either via session tickets from prior TLS connections or via an out-of-band mechanism.
TLS 1.3 mandates that each PSK be associated with a single hash function.
This makes it easier for formal analysis to exclude cross-protocol attacks where the same key is used in multiple different contexts.

> TLS 1.2 also supports PSK-based handshakes, but does not require they be provisioned with a single hash function, any PSK may be used with any supported hash function and the TLS 1.2 PRF.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLS 1.2 also supports PSK-based handshakes, but does not require they be provisioned with a single hash function. Any PSK may be used with any supported hash function and the TLS 1.2 PRF.
```

This means that PSKs can be used in different contexts within TLS 1.2, and further can be used in TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3 with the same hash function.
Therefore a server that accepts both TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3 PSK handshakes with the same PSK could potentially be vulnerable to cross-protocol attacks.

This draft describes a method for processing PSKs such that they can be securely used with both TLS 1.2 and TLS 1.3.

> The design is such that it also allows for a PSK to be imported into TLS 1.3 with any supported hash function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The design allows for a PSK to be imported into TLS 1.3 with any supported hash function.
```

> PSKs provisioned with one hash function can be processed to produce a set of candidate PSKs, each of which is bound to a, potentially different, specific hash function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PSKs provisioned with one hash function can be processed to produce a set of candidate PSKs, each of which is bound to a potentially different and specific hash function.
```

This expands what would normally have been a single PSK identity into a set of PSK identities.

> Notably, this requires no change to the TLS 1.3 key schedule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, this makes no wire format changes and requires no change to the TLS 1.3 key schedule.
```

# Introduction

TLS 1.3 supports PSK-based handshakes, wherein PSKs can be established either via session tickets from prior TLS connections or via an out-of-band mechanism.
TLS 1.3 mandates that each PSK be associated with a single hash function.
This makes it easier for formal analysis to exclude cross-protocol attacks where the same key is used in multiple different contexts.

> TLS 1.2 also supports PSK-based handshakes, but does not require they be provisioned with a single hash function.

Reviewer 2: For the above "TLS 1.3 mandates that each PSK be associated", should "be" -> "is"?
For this "does not require they be provisioned", "they" -> "them to" or "these to"?

key exporters, wherein differentiation is done via an explicit label and context string,
the key importer defined herein uses a label and set of hash algorithms to
differentiate an external PSK into one or more PSKs for use.
The goal of both key exporters and key importers is to produce a unique channel binding that ensures that both parties agree on all relevant context.

Imported keys do not require negotiation for use, as a client and server will not agree upon

> identities if not imported correctly unless the adversary is able to choose the OOB PSK for one of the parties.

Reviewer: nit: has OOB been defined by now?

[[TODO: An alternative design might combine label and hash into the same field so that future
protocols which don't have a notion of HashAlgorithm don't need this field.]]

ImportedIdentity.label MUST be bound to the protocol into which the key is imported. Thus,
TLS 1.3 and QUICv1 {{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} MUST use the label "tls13". Similarly, TLS 1.2 and
all prior TLS versions should use "tls12" as ImportedIdentity.label, as well as SHA256 as ImportedIdentity.hash.
Note that this means future versions of TLS will increase the number of PSKs derived from an external PSK.

A unique and imported PSK (IPSK) with base key 'ipskx' bound to this identity is then computed as follows:

~~~
   epskx = HKDF-Extract(0, epsk)
   ipskx = HKDF-Expand-Label(epskx, "external psk importer",
                             Hash(Context), Hash.length)
~~~

The `Context` in this case includes the `ImportedIdentity` plus any necessary additional security context information.

~~~
  struct {
      ImportedIdentity imported_psk;
      opaque client_id<0..2^16>;
      PriorContext prior_contexts<0..2^16>;
  } Context;
~~~

> The `client_id` is an optional field that is required to be unique for each actor that knows the the EPSK.

Reviewer: Can we give examples of what values this might take, and how deployments might use it?

> This is to prevent Selfie-style reflections.

Reviewer: This needs a bit more explanation, I think. Can we add some more details?

> This is to prevent Selfie-style reflections.

Reviewer: nit: Selfie attack citation missing

This is only necessary in scenarios where more than two actors use the same key, including the case where a single agent will complete PSK handshakes as both the client and the server using the same key.

~~~
  struct {
    opaque channel_binding<1..2^16>;
    opaque secrets<0..2^16>;

>   } PriorContexts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  } PriorContext
```

This should also be defined before it's used in `Context`, I think.

~~~

`prior_contexts` is a list of prior security contexts, consisting of channel bindings and any associated keys.
In the standard case this list will be empty, as the TLS connection is not wrapped in a prior security context.
However if the OOB PSK was established through a protocol, or series of protocols, that provide a continuing security context, then including the channel binding for these contexts, as well as any keys established, binds the security contexts together.

> This makes it easier to reason formally about the exact properties are provided by the combined series of protocols.

Reviewer: As above, I think descriptions would help. Perhaps we should add a section on OOB PSK deployments and how they might translate to different `Context` values?

By hashing a distinguishing value into PSK binder, a server that recieved a reflected `ClientHello` would be unable to verify the binder, and would reject the connection.

For example a distinguishing string for IoT devices could be a MAC address, and for VMs it could be a namespace.
The decision to use this field, and what it should contain must be agreed OOB.
N.B. this value is never sent on the wire, as this would identify the client even to passive adverseries.

`prior_contexts` is a list of prior security contexts, consisting of channel bindings and any associated keys.
In the standard case this list will be empty, as the TLS connection is not wrapped in a prior security context.
However if the OOB PSK was established through a protocol, or series of protocols, that provide a continuing security context, then including the channel binding for these contexts, as well as any keys established, binds the security contexts together.
This makes it easier to reason formally about the exact properties are provided by the combined series of protocols.
For example consider chaining together two TLS sessions, but using OOB PSK importers rather than resumption.

> One could then include the prior context `<exporter_key, master_secret>`, where `exporter key` is computed using the exporter interface and a label that uniquely defines this particular setup.

Reviewer: This feels like it needs to be more precise, especially for this example. Can we add more details here? (What details I am not sure at the moment. I need to chew on this a bit more!)

[[TODO: An alternative design might combine label and hash into the same field so that future
protocols which don't have a notion of HashAlgorithm don't need this field.]]

ImportedIdentity.label MUST be bound to the protocol into which the key is imported. Thus,
TLS 1.3 and QUICv1 {{!I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} MUST use the label "tls13". Similarly, TLS 1.2 and
all prior TLS versions should use "tls12" as ImportedIdentity.label, as well as SHA256 as ImportedIdentity.hash.
Note that this means future versions of TLS will increase the number of PSKs derived from an external PSK.

A unique and imported PSK (IPSK) with base key 'ipskx' bound to this identity is then computed as follows:

~~~
   epskx = HKDF-Extract(0, epsk)
   ipskx = HKDF-Expand-Label(epskx, "external psk importer",
                             Hash(Context), Hash.length)
~~~

The `Context` in this case includes the `ImportedIdentity` plus any necessary additional security context information.

~~~
  struct {
    opaque channel_binding<1..2^16>;
    opaque secrets<0..2^16>;

>   } PriorContext

Reviewer 2: Nit: missing trailing `;`

In this case, there are two clients and two servers that know the PSK, since each endpoint acts as both client and server.
The agents are thus both vulnerable to reflection attacks where the attacker forces the agent to act as both client and server in a single connection.
This is because neither agent can distinguish between itself and its peer.
Recall both servers have the exact same configuration.
Therefore even though the session specific parameters change for each session, the client cannot distinguish between a response reflected back on it by the attacker and an honest response from its peer.
For each parameter, both servers either return the value for every session, or they return a different value for every session.
By hashing a distinguishing `client_id` value into the PSK binder, a server that received a reflected `ClientHello` would be unable to verify the binder, and would reject the connection.

For example, distinguishing strings for agents in peer-to-peer IoT device deployments could be a MAC address.
Similarly, distinguishing strings for agents in mesh VM deployments could be namespaces.
The decision to use this field and what it should contain MUST be agreed OOB.

> Note that, critically, this value is never sent on the wire, as this would identify the client even to passive adverseries.

Reviewer 2: Some issues:
- This whole text seems rather bloated, can it be written in a more concise way?
- The last sentence is not necessarily true. If a MAC address is used as client identifier, then it will be visible somewhere on the wire.
- The (non-)requirements for "client_id" is not explicitly specified. Does it have to be globally unique? What if this "requirement" is not satisfied?

The Selfie issue occurred because a PSK was reused for a client and server role. What about a simpler solution: require implementations to store the role with the PSK identity? If desired, this role (1 byte) could be explicitly included in the context.

Author: W.r.t. the Selfie issue, including the role was my initial thought, however if you think it through it actually doesn't help at all. Agent 1, acting in its role as Client sends a `ClientHello` with the role "client". The attacker reflects the `ClientHello` back at Agent 1. Agent 1, receives the `ClientHello`, and because it expects Agent 2 to use the role "client" when it acts as the client, accepts. 
The problem is specifically that both agents act completely identically, so they are indistinguishable. 
In fact, in this configuration the agents don't even know which agent they are. 

1. The text is trying to refute exactly the argument you made. It probably needs to be longer. 

2. I agree that the sentence is overbroad, I'll have to be more precise.

3. Good catch. The requirements are listed in a previous section, but the link got lost as I shuffled the text around.

##Prior Contexts {#prior-contexts-description}
In the standard case this list will be empty because the TLS connection will not be wrapped in a prior security context.
However, if the OOB PSK was established through a protocol, or series of protocols, that provide a continuing security context, then including the channel binding for these contexts, as well as any keys established, binds the security contexts together.

> This makes it easier to reason formally about the exact properties are provided by the combined series of protocols.

Reviewer 2: I guess you are concerned about a situation where two different key inputs result in the same session keys (and thus the same channel binding)? Then why not define the channel binding as including the hash of the previous transcript?

Requiring previous keys to be included here might actually weaken security as they would have to be kept around for a longer time. (That could be mitigated by precomputing the context, but that might not always be possible.)

Author: Correct. 
The reason I don't define the channel binding in that way is because it's neither a sufficient nor a necessary condition, even though including it is a very common design pattern. 
A channel binding based solely on the (public) transcript is not necessarily secure, because some security critical parameters, e.g. the keys being used, are secret. 
Consider the attack in [Cremers et al.](https://tls13tamarin.github.io/TLS13Tamarin/docs/tls13tamarin.pdf). 
The transcripts of the second session are both identical, but they agree different session keys. 

Transcripts are also not necessary. [Bhargavan et al.](https://www.ndss-symposium.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/08_5.pdf) showed that you can build secure channel bindings without using a transcript. They provide a list of what is needed in Section IV. 

I agree that keeping session keys around long term is bad practice, but that isn't the intention here. 
This is for if you want to run a compound protocol, i.e. nest one protocol inside the security context of another.
The idea is that you run all protocols in quick succession, as if they were one extended protocol. 
Because we are building a nested structure, and you keep session keys until the end of the session, if you want the security context of protocol A nested inside the security context of protocol B, you run B, keeping the keys, then run A, then delete any keys for A, then delete any keys for B. `[ ( ) ]` 
The design intentionally requires you to prove that you have access to all the keys during the establishment of the innermost session. 
Access to the channel binding is insufficient, because channel bindings are designed such that you can make them public without damaging security. 
If you have to keep your channel binding secet it's not a channel binding, it's a key. 

TL;DR: requiring the keys is a necessary condition, the channel binding is insufficient.

##Example
As an example, consider chaining together two TLS sessions using OOB PSK importers rather than resumption.
One could then include the prior context `<tls_channel_binding, master_secret>` in the second connection, where `tls_channel_binding` is computed by calling the TLS exporter interface of the first connection with a label that uniquely defines this particular setup.

> Including this channel binding in the prior contexts binds the security context of the first channel to the security context of the second channel.

Reviewer 2: The [TLS 1.2 exporter][1] output is derived from the master secret.
The [TLS 1.3 exporter][2] output is derived from the [early_]exporter_master_secret which is [derived][3] from the Early Secret or Master Secret.

Unless you do not trust the hash functions, I don't see why adding the master secret would help. Could you clarify this?

 [1]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5705#section-4
 [2]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#section-7.5
 [3]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#page-93

otherwise be required for early data with normal (ticket-based PSK) resumption. Minimally, that means ALPN,
QUIC transport settings, etc., must be provisioned alongside these EPSKs.

##Client ID {#client-id-description}

> The `client_id` is an optional field that is required to be unique for each actor that knows the EPSK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `client_id` is an optional field. If present, it MUST be unique for each actor that knows the EPSK.
```

> This is to prevent Selfie-style reflections.

Reviewer: The Selfie citation should probably go here.

> If two actors use the same `client_id` this defence may not be effective. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If two actors use the same `client_id` this defense may not be effective. 
```

> This is only necessary in scenarios where more than two actors use the same key, including the case where a single agent will complete PSK handshakes as both the client and the server using the same key.

Reviewer: This is confusing to me. This sentence suggests that including `client_id` is sufficient, whereas the previous sentence seems to contradict it? Does the previous sentence mean to say the following? 

```
If two actors have the same `client_id` this defense may not be effective.
```

(The difference being "have" vs "use")

> The Selfie attack {{Selfie}} abuses an underlying assumption of TLS, that only one client and one server know a PSK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Selfie attack {{Selfie}} abuses an underlying assumption of TLS, i.e., that only one client and server know a PSK.
```

> A pair of agents that both act as both client *and* server, and use the same PSK in both roles violate this assumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pair of agents that both act as both client and server, and use the same PSK in both roles violate this assumption.
```

In this case, there are two clients and two servers that know the PSK, since each endpoint acts as both client and server.

> Because both clients have identical configurations, an agent acting as a server can't distinguish between its peer acting as a client, and itself acting as a client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because both clients have identical configurations, an agent acting as a server cannot distinguish between its peer acting as a client, and itself acting as a client.
```

The agents are thus both vulnerable to reflection attacks where the attacker forces the agent to act as both client and server in a single connection.
Adding a role-based label is ineffective, as both the agent and its peer will add the `client` label when acting as a client, leaving them indistinguishable.

Recall both clients have identical configurations.

> Therefore even though the session specific parameters change for each session, the server cannot distinguish between a `ClientHello` reflected back on it by the attacker and a `ClientHello` from its peer.

Reviewer: This paragraph seems redundant with the prior one. I'd remove it.

Broadly speaking, there are two types of parameters in the TLS handshake, those which are constant between sessions, and those which change with every session.
Parameters that are constant between sessions can be used to 'fingerprint' peers, however, if two agents have the same configuration, they will have the same 'fingerprint'.

> Parameters that change with each session cannot be used to distinguish between two peers, because the values are always unrelated.

Reviewer: This paragraph seems... odd. What value does it add? Can we remove it?

> By hashing a distinguishing `client_id` value into the PSK binder, a server that received a reflected `ClientHello` would be unable to verify the binder, and would reject the connection.

Reviewer: Hmm, this is a bit vague.  We don't technically hash `client_id` value "into the binder," right? Perhaps:

```
Hashing a distinguishing `client_id` into the imported PSK lets endpoints distinguish between normal and reflected ClientHello messages.
```

> By hashing a distinguishing `client_id` value into the PSK binder, a server that received a reflected `ClientHello` would be unable to verify the binder, and would reject the connection.

Reviewer: Can we add a diagram to show how this would work?

This specifically breaks the symmetry of the configurations such that agents are distinguishable.

> For example, distinguishing strings for agents in peer-to-peer IoT device deployments could be a MAC address.

Reviewer: The transition here reads strange. Perhaps move these examples to come after the sentence where we say that client_ids must be unique? And replace "distinguishing strings" with "client_ids"?

Similarly, distinguishing strings for agents in mesh VM deployments could be namespaces.
The decision to use this field and what it should contain MUST be agreed OOB.

> Note that, critically, the TLS protocol never sends this value on the wire, as this would identify the client even to passive adverseries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, critically, the TLS protocol never sends `client_id` on the wire, as this would identify the client even to passive adversaries.
```

Author: Technically the `client_id` is (symbolically) sent on the wire, as it is included in the PSK binder, however it is blinded by the `epsk`. If it were unblinded but hashed then it could still be used for fingerprinting.

##Prior Contexts {#prior-contexts-description}
In the standard case this list will be empty because the TLS connection will not be wrapped in a prior security context.
However, if the OOB PSK was established through a protocol, or series of protocols, that provide a continuing security context, then including the channel binding for these contexts, as well as any keys established, binds the security contexts together.
This makes it easier to reason formally about the exact properties are provided by the combined series of protocols.

For the purposes of retaining keys the sequence of protocols should be regarded as a series of nested sessions.

> It is not generally considered best practice to maintain keys beyond the lifetime of a session, however, to establish a combined security context, in particular to provide compound authentication {{CCB}}, it is required that the secrets established in all previous sessions be included in all later ones.

Reviewer: This sentence is long! Let's break it up.
